Add readme files for Backup and Restore (#596)
kyma-project/infrastructure-manager: hack/runtime-migrator/README-rr.md

# Runtime Restore

The `runtime-restore` application
1. connects to a Gardener project, and KCP cluster
2. retrieves all existing shoot specifications
3. for each runtime on input list:
   1. gets shoot, Cluster Role Bindings and OpenIDConnect resources from the backup

>    2. patches shoot if needed 

Reviewer: Do I understand correctly that it applies `Runtime CR` that results in patching the shoot if needed?

Author: No, it patches the shoot with shoot spec from backup. I will update this description to clarify what actually happens.

# Runtime Restore

> The `runtime-restore` application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `runtime-restore` application has the following tasks:
```

> 1. connects to a Gardener project, and KCP cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Connect to a Gardener project, and a KCP cluster.
```

> 2. retrieves all existing shoot specifications

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Retrieve all existing shoot specifications.
```

> 3. for each runtime on input list:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. For each runtime on the input list:
```

>    1. gets Shoot, Cluster Role Bindings and OpenIDConnect resources from the backup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Gets the Shoot, Cluster Role Bindings and OpenIDConnect resources from the backup.
```

>    2. updates the Runtime CR to label the runtime as controlled by Provisioner to prevent KIM from modifying the shoot and the runtime resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2.  To prevent KIM from modifying the shoot and the runtime resources, update the Runtime CR to label the runtime as controlled by Provisioner.
```

>    3. patches shoot with Shoot spec read from backup 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   3. Patch the shoot with the Shoot spec read from the backup.
```

>    4. applies Cluster Role Bindings from backup provided the objects don't exist on the runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   4. Apply the ClusterRoleBindings from the backup if the objects don't exist on the runtime.
```

>    5. applies OpenIDConnect from backup provided the objects don't exist on the runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   5. Apply OpenIDConnect from the backup if the objects don't exist on the runtime.
```

## Build

> In order to build the app, run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To build the `runtime-restore` application, run:
```

```bash
go build -o ./bin/runtime-restore ./cmd/restore
``` 

## Usage

> ### Dry run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Dry Run
```

> ### Dry Run

Reviewer 2: consider switching the order of code block and explainer text like you did in https://github.com/kyma-project/infrastructure-manager/pull/596/files#r1916205022

Reviewer: done

```bash
./bin/runtime-restore \
  -gardener-kubeconfig-path=/Users/myuser/gardener-kubeconfig.yml \
  -gardener-project-name=kyma-dev  \
  -kcp-kubeconfig-path=/Users/myuser/kcp-kubeconfig.yml \
  -output-path=/tmp/ \
  -dry-run=true \
  -input-file-path=input/runtimeIds.txt \
  -input-type=txt \
  -backup-path=/Users/myuser/backup/results/backup-2025-01-10T09:27:49+01:00
```

> The above **execution example** will:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This execution example does the following:
```

> 1. take the input from the `input/runtimeIds.txt` file (each row contains single `RuntimeID`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Take the input from the `input/runtimeIds.txt` file (each row contains single `RuntimeID`).
```

> 1. proceed only with fetching `Shoot`, `Cluster Role Bindings` and `OpenIDConnect` resources from the backup directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Proceed only with fetching the `Shoot`, `Cluster Role Binding`, and `OpenIDConnect` resources from the backup directory.
```
Same as in the other README: What does the "only" mean here?

> 1. save output files in the `/tmp/<generated name>` directory. The output directory contains the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Save the output files in the `/tmp/<generated name>` directory. The output directory contains the following:
```

   - `restore-results.json` - the output file with the restore results

> ### Backup and switch Runtime to be controlled by KIM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Backup and Switch Runtime to Be Controlled by KIM
```

> 

Reviewer 2: consider switching the order of code block and explainer text like you did in https://github.com/kyma-project/infrastructure-manager/pull/596/files#r1916205022

Reviewer: done

```bash
./bin/runtime-restore \
  -gardener-kubeconfig-path=/Users/myuser/gardener-kubeconfig.yml \
  -gardener-project-name=kyma-stage  \
  -kcp-kubeconfig-path=/Users/myuser/kcp-kubeconfig.yml \
  -output-path=/tmp/ \
  -dry-run=false \
  -input-file-path=input/runtimeIds.txt \
  -input-type=txt \
  -backup-path=/Users/myuser/backup/results/backup-2025-01-10T09:27:49+01:00
```

> The above **execution example** will:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This execution example does the following:
```

> 1. take the input from the `input/runtimeIds.txt` file (each row contains single `RuntimeID`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Take the input from the `input/runtimeIds.txt` file (each row contains single `RuntimeID`).
```

> 1. proceed with fetching `Shoot`, `Cluster Role Bindings` and `OpenIDConnect` resources from the backup directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Proceed with fetching the `Shoot`, `Cluster Role Binding`, and `OpenIDConnect` resources from the backup directory.
```

> 1. patch shoot with file from backup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Patch shoot with the file from backup.
```

> 1. create Cluster Role Bindings that don't exist on the runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create ClusterRoleBindings that don't exist on the runtime.
```

> 1. create `OpenIDConnect` resources that don't exist on runtime. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create the `OpenIDConnect` resources that don't exist on runtime. 
```

> 1. save output files in the `/tmp/<generated name>` directory. The output directory contains the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Save the output files in the `/tmp/<generated name>` directory. The output directory contains the following:
```

2025/01/13 08:50:23 restore-oidc: true
2025/01/13 08:50:23
2025/01/13 08:50:23 INFO Reading runtimeIds from input file
2025/01/13 08:50:34 INFO Runtime restore performed successfully runtimeID=a774bae2-ed8b-464e-85cc-ab8acd4461d5
2025/01/13 08:50:34 ERROR Failed to fetch shoot: shoot was deleted or the runtimeID is incorrect runtimeID=exxe4b14-7bc2-4947-931c-f8673793b02f
2025/01/13 08:50:34 INFO Restore completed. Successfully restored backups: 1, Failed operations: 1
2025/01/13 08:50:34 INFO Restore results saved in: /tmp/restore-2025-01-13T08:50:23+01:00/restore-results.json
```

The restore results are saved in the `/tmp/restore-2025-01-10T14:04:14+01:00/restore-results.json` file.

The `restore-results.json` file contains the following content:
```
[
  {
    "runtimeId": "a774bae2-ed8b-464e-85cc-ab8acd4461d5",
    "shootName": "c-35a9898",
    "status": "Success",
    "restoredCRBs": [
      "admin-cw4mz"
    ],
    "restoredOIDCs": [
      "kyma-oidc-0"
    ]
  },
  {
    "runtimeId": "exxe4b14-7bc2-4947-931c-f8673793b02f",
    "shootName": "",
    "status": "Error",
    "errorMessage": "Failed to fetch shoot: shoot was deleted or the runtimeID is incorrect"
  }
]
```

> In the above example the runtime with the `exxe4b14-7bc2-4947-931c-f8673793b02f` identifier was not found. In such a case verify whether:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the above example, the runtime with the `exxe4b14-7bc2-4947-931c-f8673793b02f` identifier was not found. In such a case, verify the following:
```

> - identifier is correct

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Is the identifier correct?
```

> - the corresponding shoot exists, and has `kcp.provisioner.kyma-project.io/runtime-id` label set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Does the corresponding shoot exist, and does it has `kcp.provisioner.kyma-project.io/runtime-id` label set?
```

The runtime with the `a774bae2-ed8b-464e-85cc-ab8acd4461d5` was successfully restored. The shoot spec was patched, and the following resources recreated:

> - `admin-cw4mz` of type Cluster Role Binding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `admin-cw4mz` of type ClusterRoleBinding
```

2025/01/13 09:04:56 restore-crb: true
2025/01/13 09:04:56 restore-oidc: true
2025/01/13 09:04:56
2025/01/13 09:04:56 INFO Reading runtimeIds from input file
2025/01/13 09:05:01 WARN Verify the current state of the system. Restore should be performed manually, as the backup may overwrite user's changes. runtimeID=a774bae2-ed8b-464e-85cc-ab8acd4461d5
2025/01/13 09:05:01 ERROR Failed to fetch shoot: shoot was deleted or the runtimeID is incorrect runtimeID=exxe4b14-7bc2-4947-931c-f8673793b02f
2025/01/13 09:05:01 INFO Restore completed. Successfully restored backups: 0, Failed operations: 1
2025/01/13 09:05:01 INFO Restore results saved in: /tmp/restore-2025-01-13T09:04:56+01:00/restore-results.json
```

The `restore-results.json` file contains the following content:
```
[
  {
    "runtimeId": "a774bae2-ed8b-464e-85cc-ab8acd4461d5",
    "shootName": "c-35a9898",
    "status": "UpdateDetected"
  },
  {
    "runtimeId": "exxe4b14-7bc2-4947-931c-f8673793b02f",
    "shootName": "",
    "status": "Error",
    "errorMessage": "Failed to fetch shoot: shoot was deleted or the runtimeID is incorrect"
  }
]
```

> The runtime with the `a774bae2-ed8b-464e-85cc-ab8acd4461d5` cannot be automatically restored as there were several updates to the shoot. The runtime must be fixed manually, as there is a risk some updates performed by the user will be overwritten.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The runtime with the `a774bae2-ed8b-464e-85cc-ab8acd4461d5` cannot be automatically restored, because there were several updates to the shoot. The runtime must be fixed manually, because there is a risk that some updates performed by the user will be overwritten.
```

## Configurable Parameters

> This table lists the configurable parameters, their descriptions, and default values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following table lists the configurable parameters, their descriptions, and default values:
```

> | Parameter | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Default value          |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Default Value          |
```

|------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|

> | **kcp-kubeconfig-path** | Path to the Kubeconfig file of KCP cluster.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | `/path/to/kcp/kubeconfig` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **kcp-kubeconfig-path** | Path to the Kubeconfig file of the KCP cluster.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | `/path/to/kcp/kubeconfig` |
```

> | **gardener-kubeconfig-path** | Path to the Kubeconfig file of Gardener cluster.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | `/path/to/gardener/kubeconfig` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **gardener-kubeconfig-path** | Path to the Kubeconfig file of the Gardener cluster.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | `/path/to/gardener/kubeconfig` |
```

| **gardener-project-name** | Name of the Gardener project.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | `gardener-project-name` |

> | **output-path** | Path where generated report, and yamls will be saved. Directory has to exist.                                                                                                                                                                                                       | `/tmp/`                |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **output-path** | Path where the generated report, and the yaml files are saved. This directory must exist.                                                                                                                                                                                                       | `/tmp/`                |
```

> | **dry-run** | Dry-run flag. Has to be set to **false**, otherwise migrator will not apply the CRs on the KCP cluster.                                                                                                                                                                             | `true`                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **dry-run** | Dry-run flag. Must be set to **false**, otherwise the migrator does not apply the CRs on the KCP cluster.                                                                                                                                                                             | `true`                 |
```

> | **input-type** | Type of input to be used. Possible values: **txt** (will expect text file with one runtime identifier per line, [see the example](input/runtimeids_sample.txt)), and **json** (will expect `json` array with runtime identifiers, [see the example](input/runtimeids_sample.json)). | `json`                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **input-type** | Type of input to be used. Possible values: **txt** (expects a text file with one runtime identifier per line, [see the example](input/runtimeids_sample.txt)), and **json** (expects a `json` array with runtime identifiers, [see the example](input/runtimeids_sample.json)). | `json`                 |
```

> | **input-file-path** | Path to the file containing Runtimes to be migrated.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | `/path/to/input/file`  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **input-file-path** | Path to the file containing the runtimes to be migrated.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | `/path/to/input/file`  |
```

> | **backup-path** | Path to the directory containing backup files                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | `/path/to/input/file`  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **backup-path** | Path to the directory containing backup files.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | `/path/to/input/file`  |
```

> | **restore-crb** | Flag determining whether Cluster Role Bindings should be restored                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | `/path/to/backup/dir`                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **restore-crb** | Flag determining whether ClusterRoleBindings are restored.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | `/path/to/backup/dir`                       |
```

> | **restore-oidc** | Flag determining whether OPenIDConnect resources should be restored                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | `/path/to/backup/dir`                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **restore-oidc** | Flag determining whether OPenIDConnect resources are restored.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | `/path/to/backup/dir`                       |
```
